Sony CDU-535 Linux driver README
================================

This package contains an ALPHA linux device driver for the Sony CDU-535
CDROM drive.  This is one of the older Sony drives with its own interface
card (Sony bus).  The DOS driver for this drive is named SONY_CDU.SYS -
when you boot DOS your drive should be identified as a SONY CDU-535.  The
driver probably works with a CDU-531 also since I used that drive's
documentation to write the driver -- Sony said they were very similar.

The linux driver is based on Corey Minyard's sonycd 0.3 driver for the
CDU-31A.  I just changed the commands that were sent to the drive to
correspond to the CDU-535 commands and registers.  There were enough
changes to let bugs creep in but it seems to be stable.  I was able to tar
an entire CDROM (should read all blocks) and built ghostview and xfig off
Walnut Creek's X11R5/GNU CDROM.  xcdplayer and workman work with the
driver.  Like Minyard's original driver this one uses a polled interface
(this is also the default setup for the DOS driver).  I have not tried it
will interrupts or DMA enabled on the board.

REQUIREMENTS
============

	- Sony CDU-535 drive, preferably without interrupts and DMA 
	  enabled on the card.

	- Drive must be set up as unit 1.  Only the first unit will be 
	  recognized

	- linux kernel source and gcc compiler

FILES
=====
	README		- this file
	README.sonycd	- README from the CDU-31A driver package
	sonycd.diffs	- diffs to the kernel from the CDU-31A driver
			  package with a change in source file name from
			  sonycd.[ch] to sonycd535.[ch] - everything else
			  is the same
	driver535.tar	- the CDU-535 driver source code.  Equivalent to
			  the driver.tar mentioned in the README.sonycd

INSTALLATION
============

Follow the instructions in README.sonycd EXCEPT untar driver535.tar rather 
than the driver.tar mentioned. In this release the CDU-535 and CDU-31A 
drivers can not be installed at the same time.  (Hopefully the next 
distribution fix this.)  When you reboot after building the new kernel you 
should get a message saying Linux found your CDU-535 drive.  If it does not 
find the drive you will get a message saying so.

I am working with the kernel from the SLS release prior to the present one.
The kernel is 0.99pl4.  This is the only extra kernel patch I use.  I 
compile with normal hard disk, w/o SCSI, with all filesystems except nfs.
Default response on everything else.

NOTES:
======

1) The drive MUST be turned on when booting or it will not be recognized!

2) when the cdrom device is opened I disable the eject button to keep the
   user from ejecting a mounted disk and replacing it with another.
   Unfortunately xcdplayer and workman also open the cdrom device so you
   have to use the eject button in the software.  Keep this in mind if your
   cdrom player refuses to give up its disk -- exit workman or xcdplayer, or
   umount the drive if it has been mounted.

KNOWN BUGS
==========

1) I have trouble reading the var/tmp/.X11-unix directory on the Yggdrasil
   beta CDROM.   Work-around: don't read the directory!  If you are using
   the install script, modify the exclude file on the boot/install floppy
   to exclude this directory - then it will install without problems.
   (Note: you still have to get a kernel with this driver onto the boot 
   disk!)  Note2:  if you get this error you will not be able to umount
   the disk - you must reboot to get another CDROM mounted.

Ron Jeppesen
ronj.an@site007.saic.com
