
ANNOUNCE: MORE BINARIES UPLOADED!

Bug reports and comments to: faith@cs.unc.edu



WHAT YOU GET WITH THESE BINARIES:

*.Notes files contain instructions for installing the binary release, and
include step by step instruction of how I built the binary release from
source.  This single file contains the name of the ftp site where I got the
package, how I compiled it, and what patches were needed, if any.  IF YOU
WANT TO COMPILE THE PACKAGE YOURSELF, THIS FILE IS ALL YOU NEED (after you
get the original source distribution, of course).  If any patches were
necessary, the *.Notes file can be fed directly to patch(1), without any
editing.

*.taz files are compressed tar archives contain binaries (linked with jump
4.1 libraries using gcc 2.2.2d7 (release version), and tested under Linux
0.99.1 with jump 4.2 libraries), man pages and/or info pages (if
available), COPYING, README, etc., files from the original source
distribution, and my:

*.Notes file, described above
*.Dist  file, which was used to built the *.taz file
*.Unins file, which will uninstall most of the binary release (it leaves
              /usr/src/* intact)

The *.taz format files are compatible with the SLS systinstall program,
which can be used to install and uninstall the binary distributions.

If you don't use the SLS program, the *.taz files are ready to 'gtar zpxvf'
into /.



WHY SOME OF THE BINARIES DUMP CORE:

All of the recent binaries were linked with gcc 2.2.2d7/jump 4.1, but on a
system with libc.so.4.2 installed.  In particular, the rcs56A.taz files
will dump core *unless* you have libc.so.4.2.  On the other hand, if you
just recompile the source distribution, it appears that it will work fine
on your system with libc.so.4.2.  Please report other problems so that I
can update the solutions.




WHERE YOU CAN GET THESE BINARIES:

*.Notes files are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/sources/FSF
    sunsite.unc.edu:/pub/Linux/utils

*.taz files are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/binaries/FSF
    sunsite.unc.edu:/pub/Linux/utils

The hard to find (i.e., non-GNU) sources are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils/sources
    tsx-11.mit.edu:?
    sunsite.unc.edu:?

Source for FSF utilties are in the following places:
    prep.ai.mit.edu:/pub/gnu
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/sources/FSF/from_prep



WHAT'S NEW IN THIS RELEASE:

utila-1.2.src.tar.Z
utila12.Notes
utila12.taz

    This is a random collection of NET-2 and other source code, including:
    banner, cal, chsh (which should be setuid to root, but isn't), clear,
    col, colcrt, colrm, column, hexdump, last, mesg, od, passwd (which is
    setuid to root), reset, script, strings, ul, uuencode, uudecode, and
    whereis.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN PAGE!


utilb-1.0.src.tar.Z
utilb10.Notes
utilb10.taz

    This is a random collection of mostly custom Linux code, which, in
    general, should be in the /bin directory, including: ed, hostname,
    kill, ldd, login, more, setterm, wall, write.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN
    PAGE!

    **********************************************************************

    BE VERY CAREFUL IF YOU DON'T HAVE libc.so.4.2 INSTALLED!  You may not
    be able to log in!  Check to be sure that the programs work in some
    directory OTHER THAN /bin, *BEFORE* YOU INSTALL THEM.  ESPECIALLY
    LOGIN!

    **********************************************************************


utile-1.0.src.tar.Z
utile10.Notes
utile10.taz

    This is a random collection of mostly custom Linux code, which, in
    general, should be in the /etc directory, including: agetty, clock,
    ctrlaltdel, doshell, fastboot, fasthalt, fdformat, fdisk, frag, fsck,
    halt, kbdrate, makehole, mkfs, mkswap, mount, ramsize, reboot,
    rdev,setfdprm, setserial, shutdown, simpleinit, swapdev, swapon,
    swapoff, sync, umount, update, and vidmode.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN PAGE!
    
    The rdev command can change your kernel image's boot device, swap
    device, ramdisk size, and video mode.  The agetty and simpleinit are
    the "standard" Linux getty and init, but you have to make the links
    yourself, since some people may be using the System V versions, and I
    didn't want the tar to clobber those.  PLEASE BE VERY CAREFUL WITH
    GETTY AND INIT, SINCE THEY CAN MAKE YOUR SYSTEM UNBOOTABLE!

    Most people will have copies of these programs in /bin, and may want to
    keep them there, instead of moving them to /etc (where many people,
    myself and a bunch of manuals included, believe section 8 utilities
    belong).  If you want to keep things in /bin, however, please get the
    source distribution and fix the paths in pathnames.h.  Otherwise,
    things like shutdown won't work correctly.

    **********************************************************************

    BE VERY CAREFUL IF YOU DON'T HAVE libc.so.4.2 INSTALLED!  You may not
    be able to log in!  Check to be sure that the programs work in some
    directory OTHER THAN /etc, *BEFORE* YOU INSTALL THEM.  ESPECIALLY
    AGETTY, SIMPLEINIT, MOUNT, SWAPON, and SYNC!

    **********************************************************************



time14B.taz
time14B.Notes

    This is GNU time 1.4, which provides more output that the standard
    shell builtin time.  Therefore, I've linked gtime to time, so that this
    command can be accessed.  Has info page.  The "B" version of the binary
    release has the "magnitude of order bug" patches applied.



WHAT'S OLD IN THIS RELEASE:

Here is a synopsis of my new uploads, as of Thu Dec 24 17:05:11 1992

man-1.1.tar.Z
man11B.taz
man11B.Notes

    This is John Eaton's man 1.1, with Rik Faith's makewhatis.  It contains
    man, manpath, apropos, whatis, and /usr/lib/makewhatis.  The makewhatis
    program includes patches similar to those by Mitchum DSouza, which
    allow compressed cat pages to be used to build a whatis database.  The
    bug fixes by Willem Kasdorp have been applied.  Please send me bug
    reports! Has man pages.


file-1.25.tar.Z
file125A.taz
file125A.Notes

    This is Ian Darwin's file 1.25, which H. Lu's magic numbers for Linux.
    Please note that the current file program in use by the 386bsd and
    Linux communities is about 5 years old.  This is the latest one.  Has
    man pages.


ncompress-4.2.4.tar.Z
ncmp424A.Notes
ncmp424A.taz

    This is (N)compress 4.2.4 (an improved version of compress 4.1).  This
    untars into /bin, since it is a direct replacement for the currently
    distributed compress.  Has man pages.


agrep-2.04.tar.Z
agrp204A.taz
agrp204A.Notes

    This is Sun Wu and Udi Manber's agrep 2.04.  Has man page.  (The
    postscript papers on agrep are available from cs.arizona.edu:/agrep.)


diff20A.taz
diff20A.Notes

    This is GNU GNU diff 2.0, including diff, diff3, sdiff, and cmp (from
    textutils).  Has info pages.


bc102A.taz
bc102A.Notes

    This is GNU bc 1.02 (the GNU version is stand alone, and does not
    require dc for operation).  Has man page.


grep16A.taz
grep16A.Notes

    This is GNU grep 1.6.  Contains grep and egrep.  Has man page.


less177A.taz
less177A.Notes

    This is GNU less 1.77.  Contains less, lesskey.  Has man pages and help.


fgrep11A.taz
fgrep11A.Notes

    This is GNU fgrep 1.1.  No documentation.


sed113A.taz
sed113A.Notes

    This is GNU sed 1.13.  No documentation.


find37A.taz
find37A.Notes

    This is GNU find 3.7.  Contains find, xargs, locate, and locate support
    in /usr/lib.  Has man pages.


flex237A.taz
flex237A.Notes

    This is GNU flex 2.3.7.  Contains flex, libfl.a, and flex.skel.  Has
    man pages.


m4-103A.taz
m4-103A.Notes

    This is GNU m4 1.0.0.  Has info pages.


rcs56A.taz
rcs56A.Notes

    This is GNU rcs 5.6.  Contains ci, co, indent, merge, rcs, rcsdiff,
    rcsmerge, rlog.  Has man pages and paper.  There are reports that this
    will not work with libc.so.4.1.


indt16A.taz
indt16A.Notes

    This is GNU indent 1.6.  Has man page and info page.


tput10A.taz
tput10A.Notes

    This is GNU tput 1.0.  Has info page.


cpio22A.taz
cpio22A.Notes

    This is GNU cpio 2.2.  Contains cpio only.  Has man page.



WHAT'S OLDEST IN THIS RELEASE:

Here is a synopsis of my old uploads, as of Mon Nov 23 09:53:17 1992

Each *.taz file is a compressed tar archive containing binaries, support
files (including README, NEWS, and COPYING files from the FSF source), man
pages (when available), and info pages (when available).  Linked with jump
4.1 libraries using gcc 2.2.2d (release version), and tested under Linux
0.98.pl4 and 0.98.pl5.  I've been using these binaries with 0.99.1 and jump
4.2 libraries without problems.


bsn119A.Notes
bsn119A.taz

    This is GNU Bison 1.19 (a yacc replacement).  Has man and info pages.


futl34A.Notes
futl34A.taz

    This is GNU File Utilities 1.34.  This file contains the following
    utilities: chgrp, chown, chmod, cp, d, dd, df, dir, du, install, ln,
    ls, mkdir, mkfifo, mknod, mv, rm, rmdir, touch, v, and vdir.  Has man
    pages.


gawk214A.Notes
gawk214A.taz

    This is GNU Gawk 2.14 (an awk replacement).  gawk passes all of its
    tests except those which involve floating point exceptions, which are
    still broken in Linux.  Has man and info pages.


grof106A.Notes
grof106A.taz

    This is GNU groff 1.06 (a nroff replacement).  This file contains the
    following utilities: addftinfo, afmtodit, geqn, gindxbib, glookbib,
    gpic, grefer, grodvi, groff, grog, grops, grotty, gsoelim, gtbl,
    gtroff, lkbib, pfbtops, psbb, tfmtodit, and gnroff.  The following
    macro packages are included: man, mandoc, mdoc, ms, me, mm, mmse, mps,
    mpspic, mpsatk, mtty, mdvi, and mpic.  Drivers for ascii, postscript,
    and dvi are included.  Has man pages.


mk362A.Notes
mk362A.taz

    This is GNU make 3.62, with man and info pages.


p2012u8A.Notes
p2012u8A.taz

    This is GNU patch 2.0.12u8 with a man page.


shutl18A.Notes
shutl18A.taz

    This is GNU Shell Utilities 1.18.  This file contains the following
    utilities: [, basename, date, dirname, echo, env, expr, false, groups,
    id, logname, nice, nohup, pathchk, printenv, printf, sleep, stty, su,
    tee, test, true, tty, uname, who, whoami, yes.  Has man pages.


tar1111A.Notes
tar1111A.taz

    This is GNU tar 1.11.1.  IT IS A FSF BETA RELEASE AND HAS NO
    DOCUMENTATION.  Be very careful with this, and look for the 1.12
    release to fix bugs and be more stable.


txutl13A.Notes
txutl13A.taz

    This is GNU Text Utilities 1.3.  This file contains the following
    utilities: cat, cmp, comm, csplit, cut, expand, fold, head, join, nl,
    paste, pr, sort, split, sum, tac, tail, tr, unexpand, uniq, wc.  Has
    man pages.
